ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

### FT8 decoder architecture

This document describes the current design of the FT8 decoder in this repository: the processing pipeline, key components, and design choices (including parabolic peak interpolation for fine synchronization).

### Overview

The decoder processes one 15‑second FT8 cycle of mono PCM audio and returns all successfully decoded messages. The pipeline is:

1) Candidate search (time/frequency grid)
2) Narrow‑band baseband extraction and decimation
3) Fine time and frequency synchronization
4) Soft demodulation to log‑likelihood ratios (LLRs)
5) LDPC(174,91) decoding
6) Message bit unpacking and text decode

### Processing pipeline

#### Candidate search (coarse sync)

- File: `search.py`
- Key functions:
  - `candidate_score_map(samples_in, max_freq_bin, max_dt_in_symbols)`
  - `budget_tile_candidates(scores, dts, freqs, threshold, budget)`
  - `peak_candidates(scores, dts, freqs, threshold)`
  - `find_candidates(samples_in, max_freq_bin, max_dt_in_symbols, threshold)`

The input audio is evaluated over a time/frequency grid using short FFTs at an oversampling ratio in time and frequency. A Costas‑sequence kernel identifies likely FT8 starts via a Costas power ratio (active bins vs. unused Costas bins), and local maxima above `threshold` are returned as `(score, dt, base_freq)` candidates.

`find_candidates` selects peaks either by a global per‑tile budget (`budget_tile_candidates`, default via `FT8R_COARSE_MODE=budget`) or by simple local maxima (`peak_candidates` when `FT8R_COARSE_MODE=peak`).

#### Narrow‑band baseband extraction

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `downsample_to_baseband(samples_in, freq)`

A narrow FFT “slice” centered on the candidate base frequency is extracted, tapered at the edges, shifted to DC, and converted back to time domain at a low baseband rate (`BASEBAND_RATE_HZ`). The slice covers all 8 FT8 tones plus transition band (`SLICE_SPAN_TONES`).

#### Fine synchronization

- File: `demod.py`
- Key functions:
  - `fine_time_sync(samples, dt, search)`
  - `fine_freq_sync(samples, dt, search_hz, step_hz)`
  - `fine_sync_candidate(samples_in, freq, dt)`
  - The legacy integer-grid alignment path has been removed.

Given a coarse `(dt, freq)`, the decoder refines the start time and frequency by maximizing Costas energy around the sync positions using a quadratic‑refined method: parabolic (quadratic) interpolation over the discrete energy samples to obtain sub‑sample timing and sub‑bin frequency offsets. This uses three‑point peak fitting around the strongest integer offset/bin.

Parabolic refinement uses the standard three‑point vertex estimate (clamped to ±0.5 for stability):

```
frac = 0.5 * (y_{-1} - y_{+1}) / (y_{-1} - 2*y_0 + y_{+1})
```

#### Soft demodulation

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `soft_demod(samples_in)`

The synchronized 79 symbols (first 7, middle 7, and last 7 are Costas) are arranged in a symbol matrix. Tone responses are computed via matched complex exponentials. Costas symbols are removed and the remaining per‑symbol tone magnitudes are normalized to probabilities. Gray‑coded bit LLRs are computed by aggregating probabilities across tones that map to 0/1 for each bit position.

#### LDPC decoding

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `ldpc_decode(llrs)`

LLRs are converted into per‑bit error probabilities (with reliability scaling) and fed to a BP+OSD decoder (`ldpc.BpOsdDecoder`) using the `LDPC_174_91_H` parity matrix. The corrected 174 bits (77 payload + 14 CRC + 83 parity) are returned.

#### Full‑period decode orchestration

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `decode_full_period(samples_in, threshold)`

Calls the candidate search, applies refined (quadratic) fine synchronization, performs a light frequency microsearch on CRC failure, demodulates, LDPC‑decodes, and text‑decodes each valid message. Each successful decode returns a dictionary with `message`, `score`, `freq`, `dt`, and the decode `method` (`hard` or `ldpc`).

### Performance tuning and profiling

This project aims to decode a 15s FT8 cycle in roughly O(1s) wall time on a modern CPU. We added a combination of algorithmic optimizations, instrumentation, and environment‑tunable knobs to balance speed and robustness.

#### Instrumentation

- `utils/prof.PROFILER` provides low‑overhead section timing when enabled via `FT8R_PROFILE=1`.
- A profiling helper `scripts/profile_decode.py` measures wall time, optionally runs `cProfile`, and can export section timing JSON.
- An opt‑in performance test `tests/test_performance.py` is available when `FT8R_PERF=1`.

Suggested usage:

```
PYTHONPATH=. FT8R_PROFILE=1 python scripts/profile_decode.py websdr_test6 --json profile.json
```

#### Implementation optimizations

- Cache the 16s full‑period FFT once per decode and reuse for baseband slicing.
- Precompute the fixed edge taper window for FFT slices.
- Cache zero‑offset tone bases per `(sample_rate, sym_len)` and apply per‑frequency phase shifts for fine frequency sync.
- Vectorized Costas correlation in candidate search via indexed gathers and sums over the sparse Costas kernels (active and noise), replacing dense 2‑D convolution.
- Batched fine frequency refinement: compute Costas energies for all sub‑bin frequency hypotheses in one pass using BLAS (batched matmul), then apply parabolic interpolation.
- Batched fine time refinement: evaluate all integer offsets around `dt` using a compact strided view and a single einsum over the tone bases, then apply parabolic interpolation.
- Run a single refined alignment path. A fast CRC short‑circuit on hard decisions avoids expensive LDPC when possible.

All changes preserve numerical results; any behavior differences can be gated via environment variables described next.

#### Tuning knobs (environment variables)

- `FT8R_MAX_CANDIDATES` (default: `1500`; `0` disables capping)
  - Controls how many top candidates (time/frequency peaks) are fully processed. Trade‑off: fewer candidates reduce total alignment/LDPC work (faster), but could miss marginal signals. Default chosen with headroom: across bundled samples, candidate counts are approximately p95≈1172, p99≈1244, max≈1260; we set 1500 to exceed the observed maximum.

The legacy alignment toggles have been removed.

- `FT8R_MIN_LLR_AVG` (default: `0.0` = disabled)
  - If set to a positive float, performs an early reject when average |LLR| for a candidate is below this threshold, skipping LDPC. Trade‑off: can significantly reduce LDPC workload but risks dropping very weak decodes if set too high. Recommended only for latency‑critical deployments after tuning on your signal set.

Additional flags used in CI/testing:

- `FT8R_PERF`, `FT8R_PERF_STEM`, `FT8R_PERF_REPEATS`, `FT8R_TARGET_S`, `FT8R_PERF_ALLOW_FAIL` control the opt‑in performance test.

#### How defaults were evaluated

- We measured candidate counts across all bundled `ft8_lib-2.0` samples using `scripts/evaluate_candidate_caps.py` and saved results in `candidate_cap_eval.json`.
  - Distribution: p95≈1172, p99≈1244, max≈1260.
  - Default cap set to 1500 to exceed p99 and the observed max, providing headroom for unseen inputs while bounding worst‑case runtime.
- We profiled with `scripts/profile_decode.py` and found runtime dominated by LDPC and candidate search correlation on busy samples; the implemented caching and reuse reduced overhead meaningfully.
Legacy alignment has been removed to streamline performance and maintenance.

### Design choices

- **Parabolic vs. linear or higher‑order fits**:
  - Local second‑order model: near a well‑behaved maximum, correlation/energy curves are well approximated by a quadratic Taylor expansion. Quadratic interpolation captures curvature; linear interpolation cannot represent a peak and thus gives inferior localization accuracy.
  - Efficiency vs. accuracy: quadratic interpolation uses only the peak and two neighbors, adding minimal compute while yielding sub‑grid estimates whose error decreases rapidly with SNR.
  - Robustness: higher‑order (e.g., cubic) fits require more points and are more sensitive to noise/model mismatch. Quadratic is a strong balance for small windows.

 

### References

- Julius O. Smith III, Spectral Audio Signal Processing, “Quadratic Interpolation of Spectral Peaks.” Stanford CCRMA. [Quadratic Interpolation of Spectral Peaks](https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~jos/sasp/Quadratic_Interpolation_Spectral_Peaks.html)
- R. Quinn, “Estimation of frequency by interpolation using Fourier coefficients,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 1994.
- M. I. Smith and S. F. M. Smith, “Image registration with sub‑pixel accuracy using correlation,” IEE Proceedings, 1997.

Commit message:

pipeline: simplify coarse + demod (tile-only whitening, budget-only selection, remove early LLR gate) (#68)
* demod: remove unused early |LLR| gate and related docs; no behavior change

* coarse: drop FT8R_COARSE_MODE; always use budgeted per-tile selection; keep peak_candidates for tests/experiments

* search: remove 'global' whitening mode; always use robust per-tile whitening; update docs and scripts

* scripts: remove obsolete coarse-mode evaluation scripts (adaptive, tile-topk)

* drop analyzer from consolidated cleanup PR

ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

### FT8 decoder architecture

This document describes the current design of the FT8 decoder in this repository: the processing pipeline, key components, and design choices (including parabolic peak interpolation for fine synchronization).

### Overview

The decoder processes one 15‑second FT8 cycle of mono PCM audio and returns all successfully decoded messages. The pipeline is:

1) Candidate search (time/frequency grid)
2) Narrow‑band baseband extraction and decimation
3) Fine time and frequency synchronization
4) Soft demodulation to log‑likelihood ratios (LLRs)
5) LDPC(174,91) decoding
6) Message bit unpacking and text decode

### Processing pipeline

#### Candidate search (coarse sync)

- File: `search.py`
- Key functions:
  - `candidate_score_map(samples_in, max_freq_bin, max_dt_in_symbols)`
  - `budget_tile_candidates(scores, dts, freqs, threshold, budget)`
  - `peak_candidates(scores, dts, freqs, threshold)` (utility; not used in default pipeline)
  - `find_candidates(samples_in, max_freq_bin, max_dt_in_symbols, threshold)`

The input audio is evaluated over a time/frequency grid using short FFTs at an oversampling ratio in time and frequency. A Costas‑sequence kernel identifies likely FT8 starts via a Costas power ratio (active bins vs. unused Costas bins), and local maxima above `threshold` are returned as `(score, dt, base_freq)` candidates.

`find_candidates` uses budgeted per‑tile selection (`budget_tile_candidates`) to control candidate counts. `peak_candidates` remains available for experiments and tests.

#### Narrow‑band baseband extraction

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `downsample_to_baseband(samples_in, freq)`

A narrow FFT “slice” centered on the candidate base frequency is extracted, tapered at the edges, shifted to DC, and converted back to time domain at a low baseband rate (`BASEBAND_RATE_HZ`). The slice covers all 8 FT8 tones plus transition band (`SLICE_SPAN_TONES`).

#### Fine synchronization

- File: `demod.py`
- Key functions:
  - `fine_time_sync(samples, dt, search)`
  - `fine_freq_sync(samples, dt, search_hz, step_hz)`
  - `fine_sync_candidate(samples_in, freq, dt)`
  - The legacy integer-grid alignment path has been removed.

Given a coarse `(dt, freq)`, the decoder refines the start time and frequency by maximizing Costas energy around the sync positions using a quadratic‑refined method: parabolic (quadratic) interpolation over the discrete energy samples to obtain sub‑sample timing and sub‑bin frequency offsets. This uses three‑point peak fitting around the strongest integer offset/bin.

Parabolic refinement uses the standard three‑point vertex estimate (clamped to ±0.5 for stability):

```
frac = 0.5 * (y_{-1} - y_{+1}) / (y_{-1} - 2*y_0 + y_{+1})
```

#### Soft demodulation

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `soft_demod(samples_in)`

The synchronized 79 symbols (first 7, middle 7, and last 7 are Costas) are arranged in a symbol matrix. Tone responses are computed via matched complex exponentials. Costas symbols are removed and the remaining per‑symbol tone magnitudes are normalized to probabilities. Gray‑coded bit LLRs are computed by aggregating probabilities across tones that map to 0/1 for each bit position.

#### LDPC decoding

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `ldpc_decode(llrs)`

LLRs are converted into per‑bit error probabilities (with reliability scaling) and fed to a BP+OSD decoder (`ldpc.BpOsdDecoder`) using the `LDPC_174_91_H` parity matrix. The corrected 174 bits (77 payload + 14 CRC + 83 parity) are returned.

#### Full‑period decode orchestration

- File: `demod.py`
- Key function: `decode_full_period(samples_in, threshold)`

Calls the candidate search, applies refined (quadratic) fine synchronization, performs a light frequency microsearch on CRC failure, demodulates, LDPC‑decodes, and text‑decodes each valid message. Each successful decode returns a dictionary with `message`, `score`, `freq`, `dt`, and the decode `method` (`hard` or `ldpc`).

### Performance tuning and profiling

This project aims to decode a 15s FT8 cycle in roughly O(1s) wall time on a modern CPU. We added a combination of algorithmic optimizations, instrumentation, and environment‑tunable knobs to balance speed and robustness.

#### Instrumentation

- `utils/prof.PROFILER` provides low‑overhead section timing when enabled via `FT8R_PROFILE=1`.
- A profiling helper `scripts/profile_decode.py` measures wall time, optionally runs `cProfile`, and can export section timing JSON.
- An opt‑in performance test `tests/test_performance.py` is available when `FT8R_PERF=1`.

Suggested usage:

```
PYTHONPATH=. FT8R_PROFILE=1 python scripts/profile_decode.py websdr_test6 --json profile.json
```

#### Implementation optimizations

- Cache the 16s full‑period FFT once per decode and reuse for baseband slicing.
- Precompute the fixed edge taper window for FFT slices.
- Cache zero‑offset tone bases per `(sample_rate, sym_len)` and apply per‑frequency phase shifts for fine frequency sync.
- Vectorized Costas correlation in candidate search via indexed gathers and sums over the sparse Costas kernels (active and noise), replacing dense 2‑D convolution.
- Batched fine frequency refinement: compute Costas energies for all sub‑bin frequency hypotheses in one pass using BLAS (batched matmul), then apply parabolic interpolation.
- Batched fine time refinement: evaluate all integer offsets around `dt` using a compact strided view and a single einsum over the tone bases, then apply parabolic interpolation.
- Run a single refined alignment path. A fast CRC short‑circuit on hard decisions avoids expensive LDPC when possible.

All changes preserve numerical results; any behavior differences can be gated via environment variables described next.

#### Tuning knobs (environment variables)

- `FT8R_MAX_CANDIDATES` (default: `1500`; `0` disables capping)
  - Controls how many top candidates (time/frequency peaks) are fully processed. Trade‑off: fewer candidates reduce total alignment/LDPC work (faster), but could miss marginal signals. Default chosen with headroom: across bundled samples, candidate counts are approximately p95≈1172, p99≈1244, max≈1260; we set 1500 to exceed the observed maximum.

The legacy alignment toggles have been removed.

- Additional flags used in CI/testing:

- `FT8R_PERF`, `FT8R_PERF_STEM`, `FT8R_PERF_REPEATS`, `FT8R_TARGET_S`, `FT8R_PERF_ALLOW_FAIL` control the opt‑in performance test.

#### How defaults were evaluated

- We measured candidate counts across all bundled `ft8_lib-2.0` samples using `scripts/evaluate_candidate_caps.py` and saved results in `candidate_cap_eval.json`.
  - Distribution: p95≈1172, p99≈1244, max≈1260.
  - Default cap set to 1500 to exceed p99 and the observed max, providing headroom for unseen inputs while bounding worst‑case runtime.
- We profiled with `scripts/profile_decode.py` and found runtime dominated by LDPC and candidate search correlation on busy samples; the implemented caching and reuse reduced overhead meaningfully.
Legacy alignment has been removed to streamline performance and maintenance.

### Design choices

- **Parabolic vs. linear or higher‑order fits**:
  - Local second‑order model: near a well‑behaved maximum, correlation/energy curves are well approximated by a quadratic Taylor expansion. Quadratic interpolation captures curvature; linear interpolation cannot represent a peak and thus gives inferior localization accuracy.
  - Efficiency vs. accuracy: quadratic interpolation uses only the peak and two neighbors, adding minimal compute while yielding sub‑grid estimates whose error decreases rapidly with SNR.
  - Robustness: higher‑order (e.g., cubic) fits require more points and are more sensitive to noise/model mismatch. Quadratic is a strong balance for small windows.

 

### References

- Julius O. Smith III, Spectral Audio Signal Processing, “Quadratic Interpolation of Spectral Peaks.” Stanford CCRMA. [Quadratic Interpolation of Spectral Peaks](https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~jos/sasp/Quadratic_Interpolation_Spectral_Peaks.html)
- R. Quinn, “Estimation of frequency by interpolation using Fourier coefficients,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 1994.
- M. I. Smith and S. F. M. Smith, “Image registration with sub‑pixel accuracy using correlation,” IEE Proceedings, 1997.
